# CHAPTER 9: COMMON VESSELS

This section describes some of the starships and other vessels that can
be commonly encountered in Cepheus Engine campaigns. These are not the
only types of vessels that exist, and creative Referees are encouraged
to integrate ships of their own creation or from other sources as they
see fit.

## TL9 Asteroid Miner

Using a 200-ton hull (4 Hull, 4 Structure,) the Asteroid Miner is
frequently used to exploit the abundant riches found in planetoid belts.
It mounts jump drive A, maneuver drive A, and power plant A, giving a
performance of Jump-1 and 1-G acceleration. Fuel tankage of 44 tons
supports the power plant for four weeks and two Jump-1 jumps. Adjacent
to the bridge is a computer Model 2. The ship is equipped with Basic
Civilian sensors (DM-2.) There are three staterooms and five low berths.
The ship has two hardpoints and two tons allocated to fire control.
Cargo capacity is 84 tons. The hull has a standard configuration, and is
armored with Titanium Steel (2 points.) Special features include three
escape pods, three tons of fuel processors (processes 60 tons of
unrefined fuel into refined fuel per day,) fuel scoops, a mining drone
and a smelter. The ship requires a crew of three: one pilot, one
navigator and one engineer. (If weapons are installed, this vessel will
also require two gunners.) The ship can carry three additional
passengers at double occupancy (one with gunners) and five low
passengers. The ship costs MCr33.219 (including discounts and fees) and
takes 44 weeks to build.

## TL11 Corvette

Using a 300-ton hull (6 Hull, 6 Structure,) the Corvette is an example
of a frigate commonly found in operation within an interstellar polity.
It mounts jump drive C, maneuver drive J, and power plant J, giving a
performance of Jump-2 and 6-G acceleration. Fuel tankage of 96 tons
supports four weeks of power plant operation and one Jump-2 jump.
Adjacent to the bridge is a computer Model 3/fib. The ship is equipped
with Advanced sensors (DM+1.) There are nine staterooms and five
emergency low berths. The ship has three hardpoints and three tons
allocated to fire control. Installed on the hardpoints are two triple
turrets armed with missiles and one triple turret armed with beam
lasers. 120 smart missiles are carried as ammunition for the missile
turrets. Cargo capacity is 25 tons. The hull is standard, armored with
Crystaliron (8 points,) and possesses a stealth coating that absorbs
radar and lidar beams, and also disguises heat emissions. Special
features include an armory, four detention cells, five tons of fuel
processors (processes 100 tons of unrefined fuel into refined fuel per
day) and fuel scoops. The ship requires a crew of 18: one commanding
officer, one pilot, one navigator, two engineers, three gunners and ten
marines. The ship can carry up to four additional passengers as
prisoners in the detention cells. The ship costs MCr194.445 (including
discounts and fees) and takes 52 weeks to build.

## TL9 Courier

Using a 100-ton hull (2 Hull, 2 Structure,) the Courier is used to
transfer critical information, vital cargo or essential personnel within
an interstellar polity, or by anyone who needs fast yet affordable
interstellar transportation. It mounts jump drive A, maneuver drive B,
and power plant B, giving a performance of Jump-2 and 4-G acceleration.
Fuel tankage of 28 tons supports the power plant and one Jump-2 jump.
Adjacent to the bridge is a computer Model 2. The ship is equipped with
Basic Civilian sensors (DM-2.) There are four staterooms and one
emergency low berth. The ship has one hardpoint and one ton allocated to
fire control, but has no weapons installed. Cargo capacity is 16 tons.
The hull is streamlined, and is armored with Titanium Steel (2 points.)
Special features include TL11 Jump Control/2 software, two tons of fuel
processors (processes 40 tons of unrefined fuel into refined fuel per
day) and fuel scoops. The ship requires a crew of three: one pilot, one
navigator and one engineer. (If weapons are installed, this vessel will
also require one gunner.) The ship can carry five passengers at double
occupancy (four with gunners) and four emergency low passengers. The
ship costs MCr35.928 (including discounts and fees) and takes 36 weeks
to build.

## TL11 Destroyer

Using an 800-ton hull (16 Hull, 16 Structure,) the Destroyer serves
primarily as an escort for cruisers and dreadnoughts and as a support
ship in fleet actions. It mounts jump drive D, maneuver drive M, and
power plant M, giving a performance of Jump-2 and 4-G acceleration. Fuel
tankage of 368 tons supports four weeks of power plant operation and two
Jump-2 jumps. Adjacent to the bridge is a computer Model 3/fib. The ship
is equipped with Advanced sensors (DM+1.) There are twelve staterooms
and six emergency low berths. The ship has eight hardpoints and eight
tons allocated to fire control. Installed on the hardpoints are two
triple turrets armed with missiles and six triple turrets armed with
beam lasers. 360 smart missiles are carried as ammunition for the
missile turrets. There are one small craft hangers carrying a ship's
boat (also included in the ship’s cost.) Cargo capacity is 50.5 tons.
The hull is standard, armored with Crystaliron (11 points,) and
possesses a stealth coating that absorbs radar and lidar beams, and also
disguises heat emissions. Special features include one armory, 23 escape
pods, nineteen tons of fuel processors (processes 380 tons of unrefined
fuel into refined fuel per day) and fuel scoops. The ship requires a
crew of 23: one commanding officer, one pilot, one navigator, three
engineers, eight gunners, one small craft pilot and ten marines. The
ship cannot carry any additional passengers. The ship costs MCr422.775
(including discounts and fees) and takes 92 weeks to build.

## TL14 Dreadnought

Using a 5000-ton hull (100 Hull, 100 Structure, divided into two
sections of 50 Hull, 50 Structure each,) the Dreadnought represents the
largest and most heavily-armed ship type within an interstellar polity.
These ships are rarely deployed outside of wartime conditions. It mounts
jump drive Z, maneuver drive Z and power plant Z, giving a performance
of Jump-2 and 2-G acceleration. Fuel tankage of 1,096 tons supports four
weeks of power plant operation and one Jump-2 jump. Adjacent to the
bridge is a computer Model 6/fib. The ship is equipped with Very
Advanced sensors (DM+2.) There are 101 staterooms, barracks for 60
troops, 223 low berths (for the Frozen Watch) and 56 emergency low
berths. The ship has fifty hardpoints and fifty tons allocated to fire
control. Installed on the hardpoints are ten fusion gun bays, five
missile bays and 35 triple turrets armed with beam lasers. 3,600 smart
missiles are carried as ammunition for the missile bays. In addition,
this vessel has two screens: a meson screen and a nuclear damper. There
are 22 small craft hangers, 20 holding fighters and two carrying cutters
(all included in the ship’s cost.) Cargo capacity is 412 tons. The hull
is standard, armored with Bonded Superdense (14 points,) and possesses a
stealth coating that absorbs radar and lidar beams, and also disguises
heat emissions. Special features include six armories, 223 escape pods,
54 tons of fuel processors (processes 1,080 tons of unrefined fuel into
refined fuel per day) and fuel scoops. The ship requires a crew of 223:
one commanding officer, one executive officer, one computer officer, two
navigation officers, one medical officer, one communications officer, 23
flight officers, one engineering officer, seven gunnery officers,
nineteen support staff, 22 flight mechanics, three engineers, fifteen
service crew, 66 gunnery crew, 60 ship's troops. In addition, there are
112 individuals in low berths serving in the Frozen Watch as replacement
personnel for casualties and battle losses; between battles, the Frozen
Watch can be revived and used to restore lost crew. The ship cannot
carry any additional passengers. The ship costs MCr2,768.145 (including
discounts and fees) and takes 428 weeks to build.

## TL9 Frontier Trader

Using a 300-ton hull (6 Hull, 6 Structure,) the Frontier Trader is
generally encountered along an interstellar polity border, as well as in
systems that are not along major trade routes. It mounts jump drive B,
maneuver drive C, and power plant C, giving a performance of Jump-1 and
2-G acceleration. Fuel tankage of 42 tons supports the power plant for
four weeks and one Jump-1 jump. Adjacent to the bridge is a computer
Model 2. The ship is equipped with Basic Civilian sensors (DM-2.) There
are 25 staterooms and twelve low berths. The ship has three hardpoints
and three tons allocated to fire control. Installed on the hardpoints
are two triple turrets armed with pulse lasers and one triple turret
armed with sandcasters. 100 canisters are carried as ammunition for the
sandcaster turrets. Cargo capacity is 75 tons. The hull has a standard
configuration, and is armored with Titanium Steel (2 points.) Special
features include three tons of fuel processors (processes 60 tons of
unrefined fuel into refined fuel per day) and fuel scoops. The ship
requires a crew of eight: one pilot, one navigator, one engineer, three
gunners and two stewards. The ship can carry 21 high passengers or 42
middle passengers at double occupancy, and twelve low passengers. The
ship costs MCr82.314 (including discounts and fees) and takes 13 weeks
to build.

## TL11 Heavy Cruiser

Using a 2000-ton hull (40 Hull, 40 Structure,) the Heavy Cruiser is a
multi-purpose warship used for a variety of independent missions. This
vessel is not commonly deployed during peacetime, except for occasional
maneuvers. It mounts jump drive N, maneuver drive N, and power plant N,
giving a performance of Jump-2 and 2-G acceleration. Fuel tankage of 452
tons supports four weeks of power plant operation and one Jump-2 jump.
Adjacent to the bridge is a computer Model 3/fib. The ship is equipped
with Advanced sensors (DM+1.) There are 42 staterooms and 20 emergency
low berths. The ship has twenty hardpoints and twenty tons allocated to
fire control. Installed on the hardpoints are four missile bays and
sixteen triple turrets armed with pulse lasers. 2160 smart missiles are
carried as ammunition for the missile bays. There are 14 small craft
hangers, twelve holding fighters and two carrying cutters (all included
in the ship’s cost.) Cargo capacity is 152.5 tons. The hull is standard,
armored with Crystaliron (11 points,) and possesses a stealth coating
that absorbs radar and lidar beams, and also disguises heat emissions.
Special features include three armories, 79 escape pods, 23 tons of fuel
processors (processes 460 tons of unrefined fuel into refined fuel per
day) and fuel scoops. The ship requires a crew of 79: four commanding
officers, one pilot, one navigator, nine engineers, twenty gunners,
fifteen small craft pilots and thirty marines. The ship cannot carry any
additional passengers. The ship costs MCr1,146.915 (including discounts
and fees) and takes 47 weeks to build.

## TL11 Light Cruiser

Using a 1000-ton hull (20 Hull, 20 Structure,) the Light Cruiser is a
multi-purpose warship used for a wide variety of independent missions.
The light cruiser as less firepower than a heavy cruiser, but is
generally faster and more maneuverable. It mounts jump drive H, maneuver
drive L, and power plant L, giving a performance of Jump-2 and 3-G
acceleration. Fuel tankage of 344 tons supports four weeks of power
plant operation and one Jump-2 jump. Adjacent to the bridge is a
computer Model 3/fib. The ship is equipped with Advanced sensors (DM+1.)
There are 23 staterooms and 11 emergency low berths. The ship has ten
hardpoints and ten tons allocated to fire control. Installed on the
hardpoints are one particle beam bay, three triple turrets armed with
missiles and six triple turrets armed with beam lasers. 540 smart
missiles are carried as ammunition for the missile turrets. There are
five small craft hangers, four holding fighters and one carrying a
ship's boat (all included in the ship’s cost.) Cargo capacity is 53
tons. The hull is standard, armored with Crystaliron (11 points,) and
possesses a stealth coating that absorbs radar and lidar beams, and also
disguises heat emissions. Special features include two armories, 43
escape pods, eighteen tons of fuel processors (processes 360 tons of
unrefined fuel into refined fuel per day) and fuel scoops. The ship
requires a crew of 43: two commanding officers, one pilot, one
navigator, four engineers, ten gunners, five small craft pilots and
twenty marines. The ship cannot carry any additional passengers. The
ship costs MCr597.870 (including discounts and fees) and takes 27 weeks
to build.

## TL9 Merchant Freighter

Using a 400-ton hull (8 Hull, 8 Structure,) the Merchant Freighter is
frequently used to haul cargo along major trade routes. It mounts jump
drive B, maneuver drive B, and power plant B, giving a performance of
Jump-1 and 1-G acceleration. Fuel tankage of 48 tons supports the power
plant for four weeks and one Jump-1 jump. Adjacent to the bridge is a
computer Model 2. The ship is equipped with Basic Civilian sensors
(DM-2.) There are four staterooms and two emergency low berths. The ship
has four hardpoints and four tons allocated to fire control, but has no
weapons installed. Cargo capacity is 261 tons. The hull has a standard
configuration, and is armored with Titanium Steel (2 points.) Special
features include three tons of fuel processors (processes 60 tons of
unrefined fuel into refined fuel per day) and fuel scoops. The ship
requires a crew of three: one pilot, one navigator and one engineer. (If
weapons are installed, this vessel will also require four gunners.) The
ship can carry two high passengers or four middle passengers at double
occupancy (none with gunners,) and eight emergency low passengers. The
ship costs MCr59.814 (including discounts and fees) and takes 60 weeks
to build.

## TL9 Merchant Liner

Using a 300-ton hull (6 Hull, 6 Structure,) the Merchant Liner is a
popular method of interstellar transport along major trade routes. It
mounts jump drive B, maneuver drive B, and power plant B, giving a
performance of Jump-1 and 1-G acceleration. Fuel tankage of 38 tons
supports the power plant for four weeks and one Jump-1 jump. Adjacent to
the bridge is a computer Model 2. The ship is equipped with Basic
Civilian sensors (DM-2.) There are 35 staterooms and 20 low berths. The
ship has three hardpoints and three tons allocated to fire control, but
has no weapons installed. Cargo capacity is 46 tons. The hull has a
standard configuration, and is armored with Titanium Steel (2 points.)
Special features include two tons of fuel processors (processes 40 tons
of unrefined fuel into refined fuel per day) and fuel scoops. The ship
requires a crew of seven: one pilot, one navigator, one engineer and
four stewards. The ship can carry 31 high passengers or 62 middle
passengers at double occupancy, and 20 low passengers. The ship costs
MCr70.209 (including discounts and fees) and takes 52 weeks to build.

## TL9 Merchant Trader

Using a 200-ton hull (4 Hull, 4 Structure,) the Merchant Trader is
frequently encountered along well-established trade routes. It mounts
jump drive A, maneuver drive A, and power plant A, giving a performance
of Jump-1 and 1-G acceleration. Fuel tankage of 24 tons supports the
power plant for four weeks and one Jump-1 jump. Adjacent to the bridge
is a computer Model 2. The ship is equipped with Basic Civilian sensors
(DM-2.) There are ten staterooms and twenty low berths. The ship has two
hardpoints and two tons allocated to fire control. Cargo capacity is 85
tons. The hull has a standard configuration, and is armored with
Titanium Steel (2 points.) Special features include two tons of fuel
processors (processes 40 tons of unrefined fuel into refined fuel per
day) and fuel scoops. The ship requires a crew of three: one pilot, one
navigator and one engineer. (If weapons are installed, this vessel will
also require two gunners. Ships may also wish to carry a medic and a
steward.) The ship can carry eight high passengers or 16 middle
passengers at double occupancy (seven high or 14 middle passengers with
gunners) and twenty low passengers. The ship costs MCr34.929 (including
discounts and fees) and takes 44 weeks to build.

## TL11 Patrol Frigate

Using a 300-ton hull (6 Hull, 6 Structure,) the Patrol Frigate performs
routine star system patrols within an interstellar polity. It mounts
jump drive C, maneuver drive F, and power plant F, giving a performance
of Jump-2 and 4-G acceleration. Fuel tankage of 84 tons supports four
weeks of power plant operation and one Jump-2 jump. Adjacent to the
bridge is a computer Model 3/fib. The ship is equipped with Advanced
sensors (DM+1.) There are ten staterooms and five emergency low berths.
The ship has three hardpoints and three tons allocated to fire control.
Installed on the hardpoints are two triple turrets armed with missiles
and one triple turret armed with beam lasers. 120 smart missiles are
carried as ammunition for the missile turrets. There are two small craft
hangers, each holding a fighter (also included in the ship’s cost.)
Cargo capacity is 23 tons. The hull is standard, armored with
Crystaliron (8 points,) and possesses a stealth coating that absorbs
radar and lidar beams, and also disguises heat emissions. Special
features include an armory, five tons of fuel processors (processes 100
tons of unrefined fuel into refined fuel per day) and fuel scoops. The
ship requires a crew of 20: one commanding officer, one pilot, one
navigator, two engineers, three gunners, two fighter pilots and ten
marines. The ship cannot carry any additional passengers. The ship costs
MCr180.675 (including discounts and fees) and takes 52 weeks to build.

## TL9 Raider

Using a 600-ton hull (6 Hull, 6 Structure,) the Raider is frequently
used by mercenary groups and pirates to perform raids on target systems.
It mounts jump drive M, maneuver drive D, and power plant M, giving a
performance of Jump-1 and 4-G acceleration. Fuel tankage of 108 tons
supports four weeks of power plant operation and one Jump-1 jump.
Adjacent to the bridge is a computer Model 2/fib. The ship is equipped
with Basic Civilian sensors (DM-2.) There are twelve staterooms and six
emergency low berths. The ship has three hardpoints and three tons
allocated to fire control. Installed on the hardpoints are six triple
turrets armed with beam lasers. There are three small craft hangers, two
holding fighters and one holding a ship’s boat (also included in the
ship’s cost.) Cargo capacity is 125 tons. The hull is standard, and
armored with Titanium Steel (8 points.) Special features include an
armory, four security containment cells (equivalent to half of a
stateroom each,) six tons of fuel processors (processes 120 tons of
unrefined fuel into refined fuel per day) and fuel scoops. The ship
requires a crew of 24: one commanding officer, one pilot, one navigator,
two engineers, six gunners, two small craft pilots and ten marines. The
ship can carry up to four additional passengers as prisoners in the
security containment cells. The ship costs MCr310.851 (including
discounts and fees) and takes 76 weeks to build.

## TL9 Research Vessel

Using a 200-ton hull (4 Hull, 4 Structure,) the Research Vessel is
popular with academic professors and independent researchers within an
interstellar polity. Reasonably inexpensive, this vessel can operate on
an annual budget of MCr3.25 (including maintenance, mortgage, life
support, fuel costs and crew salaries.) It mounts jump drive A, maneuver
drive A, and power plant A, giving a performance of Jump-1 and 1-G
acceleration. Fuel tankage of 24 tons supports the power plant for four
weeks and one Jump-1 jump. Adjacent to the bridge is a computer Model 2.
The ship is equipped with Basic Civilian sensors (DM-2.) There are six
staterooms and three emergency low berths. The ship has two hardpoints
and two tons allocated to fire control. There are two small craft
hangers, each holding a life boat/launch (also included in the ship’s
cost.) Cargo capacity is 29 tons. The hull has a standard configuration,
and is armored with Titanium Steel (2 points.) Special features include
15 probe drones, six laboratories, two tons of fuel processors
(processes 40 tons of unrefined fuel into refined fuel per day) and fuel
scoops. The ship requires a crew of nine: one pilot, one navigator, one
engineer and six scientists. (If weapons are installed, this vessel will
also require two gunners.) The ship can carry three passengers at double
occupancy (one with gunners) and twelve emergency low passengers. The
ship costs MCr73.809 (including discounts and fees) and takes 44 weeks
to build.

## TL11 Survey Vessel

Using a 300-ton hull (6 Hull, 6 Structure,) the Survey Vessel allows an
interstellar polity to continually resurvey its territory to maintain
navigation charts and beacons, and help patrol the borders and frontiers
for potential problems such as enemy warships or pirate raiders. It
mounts jump drive B, maneuver drive C, and power plant C, giving a
performance of Jump-1 and 2-G acceleration. Fuel tankage of 72 tons
supports the power plant for four weeks and two Jump-1 jumps. Adjacent
to the bridge is a computer Model 2. The ship is equipped with Basic
Civilian sensors (DM-2.) There are eight staterooms and four emergency
low berths. The ship has three hardpoints and three tons allocated to
fire control. Installed on the hardpoints are three triple turrets armed
with beam lasers. There are two small craft hangers, each holding a life
boat/launch (also included in the ship’s cost.) Cargo capacity is 39
tons. The hull has a standard configuration, and is armored with
Titanium Steel (2 points.) Special features include 20 probe drones, six
laboratories, four tons of fuel processors (processes 80 tons of
unrefined fuel into refined fuel per day) and fuel scoops. The ship
requires a crew of fourteen: one commanding officer, one pilot, one
navigator, one engineer, one medic, three gunners and six scientists.
The ship can carry two passengers at double occupancy and sixteen
emergency low passengers. The ship costs MCr120.969 (including discounts
and fees) and takes 52 weeks to build.

## TL9 System Defense Boat

Using a 400-ton hull (8 Hull, 8 Structure,) the System Defense Boat is a
non-Jump-capable spaceship commonly used to defend the vital points of a
star system. It mounts maneuver drive M and power plant M, giving a
performance of 6-G acceleration. Fuel tankage of 48 tons supports the
power plant for four weeks. Adjacent to the bridge is a computer Model
2/fib. The ship is equipped with Basic Civilian sensors (DM-2.) There
are ten staterooms and five emergency low berths. The ship has four
hardpoints and four tons allocated to fire control. Installed on the
hardpoints are two triple turrets armed with missiles and two triple
turrets armed with beam lasers. 360 smart missiles are carried as
ammunition for the missile turrets. Cargo capacity is 109 tons. The hull
has a streamlined configuration, and is armored with Titanium Steel (8
points.) Special features include an armory, three tons of fuel
processors (processes 60 tons of unrefined fuel into refined fuel per
day) and fuel scoops. The ship requires a crew of eighteen: one
commanding officer, one pilot, two engineers, four gunners and ten
marines. The ship cannot carry any additional passengers. The ship costs
MCr171.574 (including discounts and fees) and takes 60 weeks to build.

## TL9 System Monitor

Using a 1000-ton hull (20 Hull, 20 Structure,) the System Monitor is a
non-Jump-capable warship used to defend strategic locations within a
star system. The System Monitor has more firepower and defensive
capabilities than a System Defense Boat, but is much more expensive. It
mounts maneuver drivexand power plant X, giving a performance of 6-G
acceleration. Fuel tankage of 88 tons supports four weeks of power plant
operation. Adjacent to the bridge is a computer Model 2/fib. The ship is
equipped with Basic Civilian sensors (DM-2,) in keeping with its TL9
design. There are 24 staterooms and 12 emergency low berths. The ship
has ten hardpoints and ten tons allocated to fire control. Installed on
the hardpoints are one particle beam bay, three triple turrets armed
with missiles, three triple turrets armed with pulse lasers and three
triple turrets armed with particle beams. 1080 smart missiles are
carried as ammunition for the missile turrets. There are nine small
craft hangers, eight holding fighters and one carrying a ship's boat
(all included in the ship’s cost.) Cargo capacity is 123.5 tons. The
hull is of a standard configuration and is armored with Titanium Steel
(9 points.) Special features include two armories, 45 escape pods, five
tons of fuel processors (processes 100 tons of unrefined fuel into
refined fuel per day) and fuel scoops. The ship requires a crew of 45:
two commanding officers, one pilot, three engineers, ten gunners, nine
small craft pilots and twenty marines. The ship cannot carry any
additional passengers. The ship costs MCr610.461 (including discounts
and fees) and takes 108 weeks to build.

## TL9 Yacht

Using a 100-ton hull (2 Hull, 2 Structure,) the Yacht is the smallest
civilian starship that is commonly encountered in an interstellar
polity. Commonly used by nobles, dignitaries and other officials, this
vessel provides luxurious transport for any celebrity and their
entourage. It mounts jump drive A, maneuver drive A, and power plant A,
giving a performance of Jump-2 and 2-G acceleration. Fuel tankage of 24
tons supports the power plant and one Jump-2 jump. Adjacent to the
bridge is a computer Model 2. The ship is equipped with Basic Civilian
sensors (DM-2.) There are six staterooms (two of which are combined into
a luxurious suite), and three emergency low berths. The ship has one
hardpoint and one ton allocated to fire control, but has no weapons
installed. Cargo capacity is 12 tons. The hull is streamlined, and is
armored with Titanium Steel (2 points.) Special features include TL11
Jump Control/2 software, two tons of fuel processors (processes 40 tons
of unrefined fuel into refined fuel per day,) fuel scoops and two tons
of luxuries (effectively replacing the need for a steward.) The ship
requires a crew of three: one pilot, one navigator and one engineer. (If
weapons are installed, this vessel will also require one gunner.) The
ship can carry one noble and five passengers at double occupancy (four
with gunners) and twelve emergency low passengers. (Filling the suite to
its maximum capacity would add three more passengers.) The ship costs
MCr26.388 (including discounts and fees) and takes 36 weeks to build.

## Common Small Craft

The following are common small craft designs found in most Cepheus
Engine universes.

### TL 9 Cutter

Using a 50-ton hull (1 Hull, 1 Structure), the Cutter is designed to
take a sealed 30-ton module from surface to orbit, allowing for a wide
range of customized uses, depending on the contents of the module. It
mounts maneuver drive sK and power plant sK, giving a performance of 4-G
acceleration. Fuel tankage of 1.3 tons supports the power plant for one
week. Adjacent to the bridge is a computer Model 1. The ship is equipped
with Standard sensors (-4). There is a one-man control cabin and
additional cabin space for one passenger. The ship has one hardpoint and
one ton allocated for fire control. This small craft does not come with
weapons pre-installed. Cargo capacity is 1.3 tons. The hull is Standard,
and no additional armor has been installed. Special features include a
30-ton module berth, into which one of a variety of specialized modules
can be installed (as captured in the Cutter Module Options table). This
ship requires a crew of one: Pilot. The ship can carry one additional
passenger in the control cabin. The ship costs MCr24.305 (including
discounts and fees), not including module costs, and takes 32 weeks to
build.

#### Table: Cutter Module Options

| Module Type         | Cost (MCr) | Notes                                                     |
|---------------------|------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|
| Cargo               | 1.5        | Cargo (29 tons), 1 airlock                                |
| Commuter            | 2.5        | Cabin (18 people), 1 airlock, 1 small fresher/kitchenette |
| Fuel                | 1.25       | Fuel tankage (28.5 tons), Fuel processors (1.5 tons)      |
| Laboratory          | 8          | Laboratory (7 scientists), 2 airlocks                     |
| Low Berth Transport | 4          | 58 low berths, 1 airlock                                  |
| Luxury Suites       | 4.5        | 7 staterooms, 2 airlocks                                  |
| Prison Transport    | 4.5        | 14 detention cells, 1 airlock                             |
| Vehicular Transport | 6.75       | Hangar (23 tons of vehicles), allows repairs/maintenance  |

### TL 9 Fighter

Using a 10-ton hull (0 Hull, 1 Structure), the Fighter is a short-range
combat vessel primarily used in system defense and large scale naval
engagements. It mounts maneuver drive sC and power plant sL, giving a
performance of 6-G acceleration. Fuel tankage of 1.5 tons supports the
power plant for one week. Adjacent to the bridge is a computer Model
1/fib. The ship is equipped with Standard sensors (-4). There is a
one-man cockpit. The ship has one hardpoint and one ton allocated for
fire control. Installed on the hardpoint is a fixed mount single turret
armed with a pulse laser. This small craft has no cargo capacity. The
hull is Streamlined, and no additional armor has been installed. This
ship comes equipped with fuel scoops. This ship requires a crew of one:
Pilot. The ship cannot carry any additional passengers. The ship costs
MCr10.841 (including discounts and fees) and takes 28 weeks to build.

### TL 9 Launch

Using a 20-ton hull (0 Hull, 1 Structure), the Launch is designed to
provide basic transportation needs, and is sometimes used as a lifeboat
in the event of emergencies in deep space. It mounts maneuver drive sA
and power plant sA, giving a performance of 1-G acceleration. Fuel
tankage of 0.4 tons supports the power plant for one week. Adjacent to
the bridge is a computer Model 1. The ship is equipped with Standard
sensors (-4). There is a two-man control cabin. The ship has one
hardpoint and one ton allocated for fire control. This small craft does
not come with weapons pre-installed. Cargo capacity is 10.9 tons. The
hull is Standard, and no additional armor has been installed. There are
no special features on this ship. This ship requires a crew of one:
Pilot. The ship cannot carry any additional passengers. The ship costs
MCr4.797 (including discounts and fees) and takes 29 weeks to build.

### TL 9 Pinnace

Using a 40-ton hull (0 Hull, 1 Structure), the Pinnace primarily serves
as cargo transport on an interplanetary scale. It mounts maneuver drive
sK and power plant sL, giving a performance of 5-G acceleration. Fuel
tankage of 1.5 tons supports the power plant for one week. Adjacent to
the bridge is a computer Model 1. The ship is equipped with Standard
sensors (-4). There is a one-man control cabin. The ship has one
hardpoint and one ton allocated for fire control. This small craft does
not come with weapons pre-installed. Cargo capacity is 25 tons. The hull
is Standard, and no additional armor has been installed. There are no
special features on this ship. This ship requires a crew of one: Pilot.
The ship cannot carry any additional passengers. The ship costs
MCr18.567 (including discounts and fees) and takes 31 weeks to build.

### TL 9 Ship's Boat

Using a 30-ton hull (0 Hull, 1 Structure), the Ship's Boat is a
general-purpose small craft designed to cover a range of tasks. It
mounts maneuver drive sJ and power plant sJ, giving a performance of 6-G
acceleration. Fuel tankage of 1.2 tons supports the power plant for one
week. Adjacent to the bridge is a computer Model 1. The ship is equipped
with Standard sensors (-4). There is a one-man control cabin. The ship
has one hardpoint and one ton allocated for fire control. This small
craft does not come with weapons pre-installed. Cargo capacity is 16.7
tons. The hull is Standard, and no additional armor has been installed.
There are no special features on this ship. This ship requires a crew of
one: Pilot. The ship cannot carry any additional passengers. The ship
costs MCr16.677 (including discounts and fees) and takes 30 weeks to
build.

### TL 9 Shuttle

Using a 90-ton hull (1 Hull, 1 Structure), the Shuttle provides
significantly more cargo transport capacity than the less expensive
pinnace, at the cost of slower performance. It mounts maneuver drive sN
and power plant sN, giving a performance of 3-G acceleration. Fuel
tankage of 1.9 tons supports the power plant for one week. Adjacent to
the bridge is a computer Model 1. The ship is equipped with Standard
sensors (-4). There is a two-man control cabin. The ship has one
hardpoint and one ton allocated for fire control. This small craft does
not come with weapons pre-installed. Cargo capacity is 67.4 tons. The
hull is Standard, and no additional armor has been installed. There are
no special features on this ship. This ship requires a crew of two: Two
pilots. The ship can carry one additional passenger in the control
cabin. The ship costs MCr25.587 (including discounts and fees) and takes
35 weeks to build.
