# CHAPTER 16: REFEREEING THE GAME

The Referee is the person who takes responsibility for running a Cepheus
Engine game. The Referee creates the adventure, runs the players through
it, takes on the roles of the various characters the characters meet,
and handles any questions about the rules. While running the game is a
big responsibility, it's not as hard as it might seem, and providing a
fun and entertaining game for your friends can be quite rewarding.

The rules of Cepheus Engine provide a comprehensive outline for the
basic activities confronting any character in the universe you are
creating. These rules are necessarily brief and admittedly omit many
possible activities. After all, a roleplaying game cannot ever attempt
to provide adequate rules that govern the entire universe. In the hands
of players and a Referee, however, the Cepheus Engine rules are the
start of dynamic adventures that can range across the universe.

This chapter is about helping you as the Referee run your games. The
advice found within this chapter is completely optional; feel free to
use it or ignore it as you like.

## Rule Zero

Remember that it is just a game. The most important thing in it is to
have fun, both for you and your players, and everything else is
secondary to that. So if a rule, a plot, or even realism and consistency
get in the way of your fun or that of your players, it is your right and
duty as the Referee to change it. As a Referee, you, not the rulebooks,
are the final arbiter in your game. This is a serious responsibility,
but also a great freedom: the freedom to create and run an entertaining
game that suits your needs and the needs of your group. If you and your
players are enjoying yourself, you are doing things right, even if you
are ignoring or modifying the rules and even if your game is not
necessarily realistic or even self-consistent.

With that in mind, the most important rule of the game, dubbed Rule Zero
in the Cepheus Engine rules, is that the Referee always has the right to
modify the rules. As a Referee, your rules modifications can be as
simple and improvised as “um, grab some dice, roll them, and tell me the
number” or involve extremely complex home-brew charts that dictate the
smallest of details. This is your game, after all.

## Gaming Style

Every gamer tends to enjoy a specific gaming style. Some people are
consummate “Role-Players”, gaining a lot of pleasure from character
development and interaction. Others are intense “Combat Monkeys”,
finding that an action-packed cinematic frenzy of laser bolts and hand
grenades meets their gaming needs. Some players are “Puzzle Solvers”,
finding the mental challenges of riddles, logic problems, puzzles and
mystery adventures to be the perfect balm. Most of us are a mix of all
of the above, in differing proportions and varying levels of interest
and intensity.

As a Referee, it is recommended that you bear in mind that all styles of
play are valid. If everyone is an action fan, combat-heavy games work
well. Roleplaying the group’s interactions with shopkeepers can be
entertaining, as well. For some, delivering long angst-ridden poetry
in-game can be fulfilling. Intraparty conflict might be a good thing,
with the right group of gamers. Even violating the advice found in these
rules is perfectly okay, so long as the entire gaming group is having
fun. Remember Rule Zero!

Be aware of what you and your players want. If you want something
different from your players, something is going to have to change.
Logically, it should be the group in the minority, which in this case
would be you as the Referee. Similarly, if a single player wants a
different style of play, if it can't be easily integrated, don't force
the issue. Sometimes players or Referees don't fit a particular gaming
group’s style. It does not make anyone wrong; things just did not work
out or come together for that particular game.

## Improvisation

One of the keys to successfully running a Cepheus Engine session boils
down to your ability to improvise when circumstances so dictate. You can
certainly plan everything out for your session, to the degree with which
you are comfortable. However, at some point in time, whether
intentionally or accidentally, you are going to have to improvise a
scenario that you did not plan in advance. Maybe the mercenary rolled
poorly in that last combat, dying during the previous encounter, and the
corporate executive that hired the adventurers only made the deal with
him. Perhaps the party decides to pursue another adventure, which you
had not yet prepared, half-way through the current one, based on a clue
they found in the second encounter of the evening. Whatever the reason,
you should be prepared as a Referee to improvise as needed to keep the
session moving.

A common misconception exists that improvisation during a game and
preparation for a game are two opposed approaches. To the contrary, the
more efficiently you prepare for the game, the easier it will be for you
to improvise and “wing it” during actual play. The key to efficient
preparation is not deciding ahead what the characters will do (leave
that to the players), but rather creating material which would both
allow the players to do exciting things and which will allow you to
easily set up challenges, encounters, NPCs, locations and plots that
will fit the flow of the game. This might sound like a lot of work at
first but is actually much simpler, the key here is to create flexible
material which will fit different plot lines, different locations and
different uses with ease.

In today’s world, spare time and inspiration tends to come at unexpected
and irregular times. Carry a small notebook with you. Whenever an idea
for whatever part of your game strikes your mind, jot it down in the
notebook. Later on, when you happen to have a little more spare time,
look these ideas and develop the ones you like a little bit more.
Organize a binder at home (or a directory on your computer), with
different partitions (or electronic files) for NPCs, locations,
creatures, locations and plot hooks. Each item (NPC, location etc) you
develop shouldn't be long, a few sentences per item will work in most
cases (remember that most stats for a character or creature will fit in
a small paragraph, if not a single sentence.) Keep these well-organized
and these could be used whenever you need them in-game or in a
short-term preparation for the game. The same goes for location maps you
happen to doodle during work, while riding public transit or while
attending boring classes or lectures, nothing of this kind should go to
waste.

Most of the adventure elements you prepare, even locations or NPCs
intended to be used in a specific plot line, should be designed in such
a way that it will be easy to 'recycle' these elements for use in
different circumstances in the event you don’t use that element in the
intended plot or location. Players have a tendency to miss the stuff
you've labored hard to create, so be prepared to make a few changes to
all the unused bits and pieces of previous adventures to use in the next
ones.

### Improvisational Preparation

It is definitely possible to prepare in advance for improvisation. It is
suggested that Referees consider preparing the following for their
adventure or campaign:

**A list of random names** for NPCs, locations and vessels can serve any
Referee well. Take them from any source you like, your imagination,
baby-name sites, even phone books, but it always helps to have a quick
source of names for the people and places you have to create on the fly
rather than just calling them “this guy” or “that tower”. That way, when
the characters ask a random citizen for their name, you can easily
choose one from your list, provide it to the group and then cross it
off. Having the ability to name a character or place quickly helps
establish a strong sense of depth and internal consistency within your
setting.

Many Referees also find it helpful to keep **a small collection of
generic locations and encounters** on hand, in case the party decides to
go in an unexpected direction. It is perfectly okay to use adventures or
modules that you find online or in the products you own. If you can
create a few easy-to-place encounters beforehand, this could also prove
to be very useful. Your goal here is simply to have activities for the
characters to do through the rest of the given gaming session. You can
always recoup and plot a better strategy for this new direction the
players have taken between sessions. These little scenarios just give
you a delaying tactic that lets you entertain your players at the same
time.

**A collection of stat blocks** for stock NPCs, perhaps expanding on the
small collection found later in this guide, can provide you with
potential allies, contacts, rivals, enemies, bystanders and potentially
even ready-made player-characters should the need arise over the course
of the gaming session.

Creating **a reference sheet** of the player-characters’ important
combat statistics can help you evaluate the impact of an encounter or
challenge when you have to improvise a scenario on the fly.

A notebook or electronic document for **session notes** can help you
capture the details you’ve created for your campaign or adventure,
either on the fly or through early preparation. With this, you are more
likely to provide a consistent and vibrant gaming experience.

### Recycling Game Material

As preparation time is limited for most Referees, you may find it of
good benefit to maximize your effective use of material and rules while
minimizing the time devoted to creating new non-player characters,
vessels, adventures or locations from scratch. The nature of the Cepheus
Engine is of great help here, as the rules are relatively simple and
abstract; a major part of each animal, location, vessel or character is
nothing but narrative, and narrative is easy to change. This is called
“reskinning”. By changing the narrative, the stat block for a veteran
mercenary might be reused as an alien hunter with little or no
modifications to the game mechanics.

A good example is the use of location floor plans. If, for example,
you've downloaded or bought detailed floor plans for a particular
location (or a product including these floor plans) or perhaps you’ve
found them online, you can utilize them in more than one way. If the
floor plans originally detailed the hidden base of some human space
pirates, you can still easily modify them to be used for an alien
fortress, for the remnants of a research facility devastated by a
natural disaster, or even for a private mansion for an eccentric
corporate executive. The map can remain the same, or largely the same,
but the description can change the perception of the players.

## Running the Game

The first rule of the Cepheus Engine system is to have fun. A good
Referee will make a reasonable effort to create a gaming experience that
is fun for everyone. The following guidelines might help with that.

### Assigning Difficulties

At the core of every Cepheus Engine adventure lies a sequence of tasks
that the character must accomplish in order to succeed. The Referee is
in charge of assigning the difficulty of these tasks, and then
interpreting the outcome. The default is Average (+0). Make a task
easier if you want a particular task to be accomplished, but not be
everyone. This will highlight characters with skill levels in an easy
way. If you want to make a task challenging, but still feel comfortable
with giving the players a good chance of success, set the Difficulty to
Difficult (-2). Reserve Very Difficult (-4) and Formidable (-6) for very
special circumstances, such as attempting the near impossible. As the
Referee, you may not want to say “No” except in the most extreme
circumstances, but assigning a Difficulty of Formidable (-6) is almost
as good, and can create some interesting story developments and a sense
of excited accomplishment should the character succeed.

### Modifying the Roll or the Difficulty

There are two ways of making a task easier or harder: modify the
character's die roll or modify the task's Difficulty. Generally
speaking, circumstances affecting a character's performance, like having
just the right tools for the job or being forced to improvise, apply a
modifier to the die roll. Circumstances making the task easier or harder
to accomplish, like a favorable or unfavorable environment or a
particularly demanding task, modify the Difficulty. If a condition
applies to the character -- like knowledge, health, equipment,
preparedness, and such -- it's usually a die modifier. It doesn't have
to be too fine a line, since modifying the die roll or the Difficulty
amounts to the same thing in the end: the task being easier or harder to
accomplish.

### Circumstance Modifiers

Some circumstances make a check easier or harder, resulting in a bonus
or penalty that is added to the check result. The Referee can alter the
odds of success in two ways:

-   If a character has help, such as good tools, competent aids or other
    beneficial circumstances, he receives a +1 bonus to his skill check.

-   If a character is hampered, such as having defective tools,
    incompetent assistance or other negative circumstances, he receives
    a -1 penalty to his skill check.

### Automatic Successes

Sometimes it is just easier to assume the character automatically
succeeds at a skill check. If the character has an applicable skill, and
the results of the skill check do not impact the progress of the story,
endanger the character, and the actual success or failure is not
interesting, just assume the character succeeds and move on. Remember,
the Cepheus Engine rules suggest that the Referee should only call for
checks:

-   When the characters are in danger.

-   When the task is especially difficult or hazardous.

-   When the characters are under the pressure of time.

-   When success or failure is especially important or interesting.

### Using Opposed Checks

Opposed checks are a great way to create tension between two
individuals. Suddenly, the players can target their attention on an NPC,
and that helps with immersion into the game. Should two or more
characters seek to do the same thing at the same time, or to resist one
another’s actions, use an opposed check. The highest check result wins.

## That’s not in the Rules

Sometimes in the course of play, things come up that are not covered in
the rules. When this happens, the Referee is responsible for these
handling situations, making fair evaluations of what the characters do
and deciding what happens as a result. As the Referee, you will need to
quickly improvise a solution. The easiest way to do so is to simply
decide if the suggested action is fun or not, and if it is fun, let it
happen, then throw in a complication that adds to the enjoyment of the
scene. Some Referees prefer a more mechanical approach. Identify a skill
the covers the basic nature of the request, set a Difficulty of Average
(+0) or Difficult (-2), and let them try. If nothing comes to mind
immediately, ask the player to tell you what skill they would use to
accomplish this task. If no skill appears to work, then choose the best
characteristic, and have the player roll a characteristic check. However
you decide to resolve it, the key here is to quickly address the request
and keep the game moving forward.

## Solo Play as Referee Prep Work

Many of the Cepheus Engines rule subsystems can be leveraged for solo
play. For Referees, this can turn building a universe of their own into
a game in and of itself. What follows is a list of suggested activities
that can prove to be fun in and of themselves, as well as help Referees
create new material for their personal adventures and campaigns. In
addition, solo play can help Referees learn the rules and become more
proficient for when they run games before a group of players.

Solo play is not limited to Referees. Players can also learn a lot about
and enjoy aspects of the Cepheus Engine rules through solo play in those
times when a Referee or gaming group is not currently available.

### Character Creation

A Referee always needs non-player characters. Use the information in
**Chapter 1: Character Creation** to generate new characters. These
characters can easily become future patrons, random encounters, enemies,
allies or simply background characters for a Cepheus Engine universe.

### Personal Combat

Take some characters and use the rules from **Chapter 5: Personal
Combat** to practice the combat system. Recreate scenes from science
fiction or action movies using the characters, to get a feel for how the
rules of combat work in various scenarios.

### Starship Construction

Construct some starships and other vessels using the rules in **Chapter
8: Ship Design and Construction**. Build on various scales, to get an
idea of how the different elements of starship construction work
together. You can even use the information under Starship Revenues in
**Chapter 6: Off-World Travel** to determine if your ships would be
economically viable without outside assistance.

### Space Combat

Take some vessels and pit them against one another using the space
combat rules found in **Chapter 10: Space Combat**. Once again, feel
free to recreate scenes from science fiction movies using the vessels,
to get a feel for how the rules of space combat work in various
scenarios.

### Subsector Creation

Using the rules found in **Chapter 12: Worlds**, create a subsector and
identify the systems within it. Generate and record the UWPs for every
system. After the worlds have been created, look over the subsector for
possible communication and trade routes. If you are inspired, create
some background information on the most interesting worlds.

### Animal Encounter Creation

Choose a world from a list of UWPs, and expand on it. Create some maps
of the planet's surface, and the build encounter tables for each terrain
type on the map, using the rules found in **Chapter 13: Planetary
Wilderness Encounters**. If you are so inclined, you can then pit some
characters against the different animals you've created using the
personal combat, so see how they might fare against player characters in
the future.

### Practice Trade and Commerce

Grab a 200-ton TL9 Merchant Trader and use the **Chapter 7: Trade and
Commerce** rules to explore the economic environment of a generated
subsector. Use the rules for passengers, freight and even speculative
trading to get a feel for them. By tracking the revenue and expenses for
the ship, it could give you an idea of where traders will focus their
attentions within the subsector. If this is being played as a solo game,
keep going until either the ship is paid for or the ship goes bankrupt.
This is a good way to validate trade routes, and identify "stepping
stone" worlds between strong markets in a subsector.

### Patron Encounter Creation

The seed of most adventures within a Cepheus Engine universe are
captured in patron encounters. Using the details of a subsector's list
of UWPs, create and record some patron encounters using the format found
under **Patron Encounters** in **Chapter 14: Social Encounters**. Think
about science fiction and action-based movies, television shows and
literature, and use those to inspire some of the patron encounters you
create.
